---
layout: post
title: Be unusually effective
subtitle:
summary:
categories: 
date: 2024-03-10
---

Most people won't, but you can do just about anything.

Underlying this ability are the characteristics of ownership and
agency.

Ownership is when, if you should do or want something done, you know
that it's on you. It's not someone else's problem.

Agency is underpinned by the belief that anything can be done, and
demonstrated by a set of behaviors that boil down to the
following. First, identify the problem/goal/desire. Make a plan to
achieve it (you should probably write it down, and identify a proximal
goal if the ultimate goal is far out). Then, do the first thing in
your plan. Evaluate the plan based on the outcome of that first
action. Repeat.

It is deeply empowering (and at times, overwhelming) to act as though
everything that’s out there is a problem that you can solve, and if
it's the right problem to solve, must solve. 

In situations where others might say “that’s not my problem; it’s
someone else’s issue to solve”, instead you’re saying “let’s remove or
avoid this obstacle, without prejudice, now and keep running at the
goal”. Where others might say "I can't do that; I don't know how", and
give up, you're saying "I'm going to figure this out, eventually".

You will stop thinking of problems as misfortunes, but think of the
solution to this problem as a goal to achieve. From there, you will
formulate a plan. You will start to get excited that you know what the
next step is, and stop viewing problems as a problem at all, and more
like a glimpse of a strategy for your next success. Every problem is
an opportunity; you know that by solving it, you're making
progress. And if you don't know what the next step is, even after
writing down the problem and trying to come up with a plan, just act
in the world. Perturb the space and observe the response. Then you
might know what to do next.

Just because you feel ownership and have agency doesn’t mean that
you’re responsible for doing everything by yourself. This is a common
failure mode of an ownership mindset. But you can and should rally
other people and resources to your cause. Embrace as part of the
challenge identifying which are realistic, who you can influence or
direct, and what you may have to give up. You will prioritize and
deprioritize. Never say “it’s someone else’s problem” and fold your
arms. More than being ineffective, doing so is disrespectful to
yourself. It diminishes your agency and discounts your ability to act
in the world.

Finally, there aren’t rules. There are principles and values we will
abide by while accomplishing our goals. There are structures (like the
legal system) we choose to act within. Most of what keeps us from our
goals are self-imposed rules. Don't blame society or others for these
rules: you're not a victim, you own these decisions. You're an agent,
and you can act.

You can prepare and learn forever, but only action gets it done. The
belief you must cleave to is that you can do it, and that you are
responsible for ensuring it is done.

